ALGORITHM EFFICIENCY EXPERIMENT — INSTRUCTIONS
Publication edition, 6 October 2026

Use the section matching your purpose. Reading reports, reproducing public
statistics, rerunning the portable CPU demonstration, and conducting a new Pi
hardware experiment are different activities with different prerequisites.
The completed campaigns remain closed. None of these instructions asks you to
restart them, apply a rejected policy, overwrite saved evidence or download a
model automatically.

1. READ THE RESULTS WITHOUT HARDWARE

Start with README.txt, RESEARCH-PAPER.txt and COMPLETION-RESULTS.txt. Check
PUBLICATION-MANIFEST.json for files included in your edition and the applicable
PUBLICATION-STATUS.json for delivery/verification state. Open included HTML
reports locally in a browser. Viewing an existing report does not require the
Pi, HAT, model weights or a Python plotting environment.

The private archive's historical README.md contains the commands used while experiments were being
developed. They are retained as history. In particular, do not copy a command
with an existing run/campaign path and assume it is a new experiment. A report
command writes derived files and must not be run against sealed evidence.

2. RUN THE ORIGINAL CPU-ONLY DEMONSTRATION

Requirements: Python 3 and NumPy. A normal Linux, macOS or Windows Python setup
can run this small numerical example; the shell commands below use a POSIX shell.
No Raspberry Pi, Hailo runtime, Vulkan driver, model, paid API or network access
is needed once Python and NumPy are installed. Installing packages may of course
require network access. The saved original environment was Python 3.12.14,
NumPy 2.3.5 on x86_64 Linux; matching those versions still does not guarantee the
same timings on a different machine or numerical-library build.

From a working checkout containing reference/algorithm_efficiency_demo.py
(retained in both editions for the harness):

  python3 -m venv "$HOME/.venvs/algorithm-efficiency-demo"
  "$HOME/.venvs/algorithm-efficiency-demo/bin/python" -m pip install numpy
  demo_output=$(mktemp -d "${TMPDIR:-/tmp}/algorithm-efficiency-demo.XXXXXX")
  "$HOME/.venvs/algorithm-efficiency-demo/bin/python" -B \
    reference/algorithm_efficiency_demo.py \
    --output "$demo_output/algorithm_efficiency_results.json"

Use an existing suitable environment instead if preferred. The mktemp command
creates a fresh directory outside the checkout. Keep that path for your result;
do not replace reference/algorithm_efficiency_results.json or the original ZIP.
On Windows, activate a virtual environment and supply your own new absolute
output path instead of using the shell variables above.

The public edition also preserves the unchanged ZIP and its three original
members in original/. To run that copy, substitute
original/algorithm_efficiency_demo.py for the reference/ path above. Keep the
original/ results and README unchanged as supplied provenance.

The program checks 36 seed/shape/variant cases, warms every measured variant,
then measures seven repetitions per variant at lengths 128, 256 and 512, with
dimension 64. Timed variant order is randomized. It compares every output
position using absolute and relative tolerances of 1e-10. The output records
individual timings, medians, correctness errors, requested threading, numerical
library configuration, memory costs and arithmetic counts. A failed numerical
assertion stops execution; do not turn that into a performance claim.

Compare cached_stream with latest_query_no_cache for the intended primary
comparison. The much less efficient full_prefix_reference is an additional
reference, not an interchangeable baseline. Results depend on your machine;
this run is a new replication of a synthetic computation, not a new result in
one of the closed Pi campaigns.

To inspect available arguments without running the benchmark:

  python3 -B reference/algorithm_efficiency_demo.py --help
  python3 -B experiment.py --help

The first command still needs NumPy because the original file imports it before
parsing arguments. The second inspects the advanced harness; it is not a model
load or a request to start an experiment.
The harness command needs its Python dependencies described in section 4;
installing NumPy alone for the original example does not provision the harness.

3. REPRODUCE THE RELEASED STATISTICS

From the public edition's root, with NumPy available, run:

  python3 -B tools/validate_public.py .

The verifier is read-only, prints JSON, checks the public package hashes and
independently reconstructs its released statistical/context checks. It does not
load a model or benchmark a device. The public-adaptation-v1 export keeps per-run
summary.json,
protocol.json and measurements.jsonl under evidence/<original-run-id>/; the NPU
release also includes fixtures.json and planned turn outcomes, including absent
and quarantined turns. These public files are derivative publication artifacts.
Their hashes certify those bytes; they are not the original private run seals.
NPU rows retain observed outcomes and explicitly mark unobserved planned turns;
they do not invent missing generations. Opaque context and token-ID arrays are
omitted from the public projection.

Use the public edition's evidence index and manifest to locate individual runs.
The exported file list defines the available scope; an absent raw tensor or
parent seal cannot be validated by a script that never received it. Preserve
the released observations and write any regenerated outputs into a new location.

Public reproduction is statistical and evidential within that curated release.
It can establish that the released inputs produce the stated summaries and
decisions. It cannot establish full raw numerical correctness, reconstruct
omitted service/ledger state, or independently verify every historical artifact.
Recorded successful private audits are evidence of those completed checks;
they are not a claim that the reduced public package can repeat every check.

CPU batch calls and repeated turns within a dialogue are not independent
experimental samples. Use the frozen grouping and paired bootstrap definitions.
Do not divide NPU correctness only by observed or valid responses: the full
planned denominator includes missing, invalid and quarantined answers.

4. ADVANCED PI ENVIRONMENT — RECORDED REQUIREMENTS

The hardware experiments used a Raspberry Pi 5 Model B Rev 1.1, ARM64/aarch64,
with the Pi OS environment based on Debian 13 (trixie). Final run manifests
record Linux 6.18.50+rpt-rpi-2712, Python 3.13.5 and glibc 2.41. Treat each run's
manifest and source snapshot as the authority for that particular measurement.

Recorded Python packages:
  NumPy 2.2.4; Jinja2 3.1.6; psutil 7.0.0.
  HailoRT and matching Python bindings 5.1.1 for NPU operations.
  Matplotlib in a separate existing environment for charts.

Native CPU/GPU build requirements:
  C++17 g++ (recorded compiler: Debian 14.2.0-19), OpenMP/libgomp,
  Vulkan headers and loader, glslc/shaderc, and the Pi Mesa V3D Vulkan driver.
  Validation runs also use Vulkan validation layers and diagnostic tooling.
  Installed package names include g++, libgomp1, libvulkan-dev, glslc,
  mesa-vulkan-drivers, vulkan-validationlayers and vulkan-tools.

The frozen build used shaderc 2025.2-1 and flags:
  -std=c++17 -O3 -mcpu=cortex-a76 -fopenmp -fPIC -shared -ffp-contract=off
Shaders target Vulkan 1.1. The shared native library links Vulkan even when a
particular call selects its CPU backend. This build is not a portable x86 build.
The standalone original NumPy demonstration does not need these dependencies.

NPU operations additionally need an installed, working AI HAT+ 2/Hailo device,
the matching 5.1.1 driver/runtime/Python stack, device access, compatible model
HEFs, and the Pi/HAT sensor interfaces used by the supervisor. The recorded
model manifest and tokenizer/chat-template identity are part of the protocol.
An arbitrary file with the same model name is not equivalent.

Recorded model identities:
  Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct.hef
    SHA-256 5310176848638505fbc28add04ba60c97abe345cdb0ec7e3b8ffaa4b0a8c65dd
  Llama-3_2-3B-Instruct.hef (3,370,416,230 bytes)
    SHA-256 1129f5f8384e4e45c5890104dc4ec1aee77e800ce1484ddc3aa942399aada425

In the private record,
campaigns/stream-model-20261003/model-provenance.json records verification against
the v5.1.1 upstream manifest. Public readers should use their evidence index,
publication manifest and THIRD-PARTY-NOTICES.txt for the released provenance.
A mismatching download was quarantined and not loaded; it was not substituted
for the verified model.
The public package does not grant a model license or redistribute model weights.
Obtain any needed third-party material under its own terms; consult
THIRD-PARTY-NOTICES.txt and the recorded provenance before using it.

5. PATHS AND EDITIONS

The original private harness records fixed installed paths in efficiency/common.py
and derives its project root from the source file location. Sealed snapshots keep
those settings. The private archive also preserves the external source mapping
needed to understand a complete restoration. Moving just a run directory does
not recreate its absolute parent, service, model and budget dependencies.

Only the public source edition adds these convenience overrides:

  export AE_MODEL_PATH=/absolute/path/to/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct.hef
  export AE_PLOT_PYTHON=/absolute/path/to/plot-environment/bin/python

AE_MODEL_PATH selects the public harness's default model path. It does not
rewrite a sealed protocol, approve a different model, supply model weights, or
make every historical stage use that model. Commands with an explicit --model
or --challenger-model retain their own role. AE_PLOT_PYTHON selects an interpreter
with plotting dependencies. These variables are not promised features of the
original private harness. See the publication manifest for the source adaptation.

Public defaults are models/hailo/v5.1.1/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct.hef below its source
root and the current Python interpreter for plotting. The recorded Llama path
is derived from the selected model's parent as
llama3.2-3b-study/Llama-3_2-3B-Instruct.hef. These defaults are file locations,
not included model weights. A different local model layout needs an explicit
compatible path, not a silent change to the model's required identity.

Use the system Python that can import the installed Hailo bindings for advanced
NPU work; a new isolated virtual environment may not see those bindings. Keep
plotting dependencies separate if needed. Existing reports can be read without
Matplotlib. Where supported, --no-charts avoids generating charts; it still
writes a report and is not an in-place audit of sealed evidence.

The advanced preflight command inspects installed identities without inference:

  python3 -B experiment.py preflight --phase cpu

For an explicitly provisioned NPU working copy, the corresponding inspection is:

  python3 -B experiment.py preflight --phase hat \
    --model /absolute/path/to/compatible-verified-model.hef

Preflight may read a large archive or model to compute its identity and requires
the platform interfaces appropriate to the selected phase. It does not install
drivers, fetch models or certify that a new machine matches every recorded run.

6. FULL PRIVATE EVIDENCE AUDITS

The complete private record supports more checks than the curated public
edition. Audit a restored copy with its original dependency layout available;
do not alter sealed inputs to make a path or identity check pass. The final
auditors return a dictionary and do not run a benchmark or load an NPU model.
For example, from the project root of a complete private restoration:

python3 -B - <<'PY'
import json
from efficiency.cpu_compare_audit import audit
result = audit('runs/completion-cpu-20261006T120615Z-compare')
print(json.dumps(result, indent=2))
raise SystemExit(0 if result['passed'] else 1)
PY

GPU and NPU equivalents are efficiency.completion_gpu_audit.audit and
efficiency.completion_npu_audit.audit. Their final run paths are recorded in
COMPLETION-RESULTS.txt. These checks can be expensive because the private raw
record is large. A failed audit is a failed audit; a missing omitted artifact
does not justify bypassing the check and reporting success.

An audit passing means its stated integrity and reconstruction checks passed.
It does not mean the candidate qualified scientifically. Conversely, the final
CPU/GPU/NPU negative decisions are preserved outcomes, not software-test failures.

7. BEFORE ANY NEW HARDWARE RESEARCH

No new measurement is required to read, publish or statistically reproduce this
completed work. A future study needs a separate proposal, fresh fixtures and
output directories, explicit gates, a frozen implementation, compatible runtime,
and its own authorized accounting. Preserve the existing cumulative ledger and
identity/journal/lock sidecars. Do not omit retry lineage to reset a time budget.

The completion family used a four-hour cumulative CPU comparison cap and
separate two-hour development/two-hour confirmation buckets for GPU, NPU, cache
and combined tracks. NPU diagnosis shared its development allowance. Setup,
authentication, cooldown and cleanup counted; buckets were not transferable.
Only infrastructure failures could justify an explicitly linked retry within
the remaining allowance. Scientific rejection closed the candidate. Failed
prerequisites left dependent stages unrun. There is no automatic retry chain.

The Pi supervisor uses an experiment lock, bounded owned processes, thermal and
memory checks and a temporary governor lease with cleanup. Hardware services
may require an available desktop authorization prompt. Do not bypass those
protections or invoke internal service entry points directly. The recorded
governor was restored to ondemand. No qualified preset exists to apply from this
roadmap, and its unspent time is not permission to start another candidate.

For troubleshooting, first distinguish a dependency/path error, an incomplete
infrastructure attempt, a numerical or answer-quality failure, and a scientific
gate rejection. Keep their evidence and meanings separate. That distinction is
part of reproducing the experiment accurately.
